Media----------------------------------------------

The Internet is the decisive technology of the Information Age,
 and with the explosion of wireless communication in the early twenty-first century, 
 we can say that humankind is now almost entirely connected, albeit with great levels of 
 inequality in bandwidth, efficiency, and price.

People, companies, and institutions feel the depth of this technological change,
 but the speed and scope of the transformation has triggered all manner of utopian
 and dystopian perceptions that, when examined closely through methodologically rigorous
 empirical research, turn out not to be accurate. For instance, media often report that
 intense use of the Internet increases the risk of isolation, alienation, and withdrawal
 from society, but available evidence shows that the Internet neither isolates people nor
 reduces their sociability; it actually increases sociability, civic engagement, and the
 intensity of family and friendship relationships, in all cultures.

Our current “network society” is a product of the digital revolution
and some major sociocultural changes. One of these is the rise of the “Me-centered society,”
 marked by an increased focus on individual growth and a decline in community understood in
 terms of space, work, family, and ascription in general. But individuation does not mean
 isolation, or the end of community. Instead, social relationships are being reconstructed
 on the basis of individual interests, values, and projects. Community is formed through individuals’
 quests for like-minded people in a process that combines online interaction with offline interaction,
 cyberspace, and the local space.

Globally, time spent on social networking sites surpassed time spent on e-mail in November 2007,
 and the number of social networking users surpassed the number of e-mail users in July 2009. Today,
 social networking sites are the preferred platforms for all kinds of activities, both business and
 personal, and sociability has dramatically increased — but it is a different kind of sociability.
 Most Facebook users visit the site daily, and they connect on multiple dimensions, but only
 on the dimensions they choose. The virtual life is becoming more social than the physical
 life, but it is less a virtual reality than a real virtuality, facilitating real-life work and urban living.
 
 Education------------------------------------------
 
 Excitement about the role of technology in improving education is a good thing as far as I’m concerned.
 Education is a segment that needs disruptive innovation. To me the hype around things like MOOCs represents 
 a longing by many for “a better educational future” – presumably involving lower costs to students and better
 career/life fulfillment, not to mention better global citizens needed to solve our global challenges. Let’s face it
 - there is a general sense that the current education system is not up to the challenges of the future. And, it’s 
 not clear how we get from “here” to “there.”

But, as leaders in the education segment we do need to get better at understanding where we have been and where
 we are going, what constitutes innovation and/or disruption that is worthy of investment?  Are you an investor?
 I would argue that any individual that is putting time into educational technology leadership at any level is an
 investor, but certainly institutions that are spending on innovation, and yes, venture capital investors (investors
 in this segment, including some pretty big names, are making some bad decisions right now about where they are putting
 their money – but this post is more about how institutions should decide to invest their resources).

In IMS we try to ferret out “winners” by looking at criteria for something we call “Learning Impact” – which is defined
 by a set of judging criteria we use in our annual Learning Impact Awards (LIAs). You can think of it as evidence that
 the application of technology in an educational setting has had a clear impact on access, affordability and/or quality.
 We’re pretty proud of this program because there is simply no way to win with hype. But, in general the whole annual
 Learning Impact event is about understanding where the innovation really is.

Right now there are quite a few over-hyped activities in the education segment.  I would include in these MOOCs,
 Common Core State Standards, analytics, badges and open educational resources (OER). Sorry if I tipped over one of
 your sacred cows there!  Over-hyped does not mean that something good will not come from these developments.
 It just means that they are being portrayed as more significant in terms of ability to “disrupt” education than
 they will be capable of delivering on. As with most hyped innovations, eventually some aspects of the innovation
 “survive,” crossing the chasm to productive advancement of the industry. The challenge for innovators and investors
 is to utilize critical thinking to rationalize what will sustain and what the real Impact will be.

MOOCs are perhaps everyone’s favorite example of hype right now. It’s difficult to imagine how something
 could have achieved more hype in the higher education segment – and they are very clearly striking a nerve
 for being potentially highly disruptive. Literally every day MOOCs are in the headlines – and smart marketers
 are trying to jump on the MOOC bandwagon even as that bandwagon morphs continually to address the glaring deficits
 of the MOOC model and quite frankly, more failures than successes at this point.

Clayton Christensen, the leading expert on “disruptive innovation,” has written at least two books specifically focused
 on education. According to Christensen’s disruptive innovation theory markets are disrupted when new entrants figure
 out an innovative way to provide a “simpler” product to a wider set of buyers at a more affordable price.
 Since the simpler product is actually what the broader market prefers (simpler means more usable, more effective
 for the desired purposes) the product is highly disruptive – better product at lower price point.  And thus, these
 new entrants change the market behavior substantially.  Jim Farmer does a very thorough job of digging into the theories
 as applied to MOOCs here.

While I, like many other silicon valley entrepreneurs, have found Christensen’s original formulations on disruptive
 innovation descriptive of what is generally seen in the high tech world, and a useful thought framework, well, the
 problem is that these formulations have not been at all predictive for education – and that is the acid test for using 
 theory for strategic gain – is it predictive?  Writing about what happened in the past and putting a framework around
 it is great – but if it doesn't help predict the future it doesn’t especially help entrepreneurs or us “investors.”

The innovators in the education segment have NOT disrupted the status quo significantly so far. While Christensen predicted
 in 2008’s Disrupting Class great disruptions in the segment from online learning, the reality so far is that greater adoption
 of online learning has continued as expected but not very disruptive: price points for education continue to rise ahead
 of inflation and while online education continues to grow it is largely seen as reflecting traditional models rather than
 a disruption.  And, while online/blended models have certainly improved access – well, the percentage of the population that
 has achieved credentials has been very level.  I wrote a paper about what the technology impact in higher education back in
 2005-7 - and the situation is not significantly different today.

Christensen was recently quoted in an interview as stating that higher education institutions are going to be in real trouble
 5 years from now. However, he has not made it clear why things will be different in the next 5 years versus the last 5 years
 since Disrupting Class was published. I do agree that “buyers” (students/parents) are in fact getting smarter about looking
 for lower cost options as well as attempting to understand the value of a higher education degree.  But I would argue that
 we are nowhere near a true disruption (rise) in the number of participants in higher education.

While it is very valuable to have any great thinker on business strategy analyzing education and providing insights from other
 industries that might apply (like Christensen), education leaders need to do their own critical thinking about these formulations
 of “disruptive innovation” in the education segment.

I’d like to provide three key factors that IMHO are needed to be understood if to  understand disruption in education. While
 these factors may be relevant to understanding MOOCs, they can be applied to other hype areas as well. Hold on to your hat
 here as these are things that we don’t hear much talk about in the education space – especially when you go to meetings on
 one of the hyped topics or even to investor conferences!

Education is a complex services business in which quality is difficult to define. Disruption in the education space requires
 better service models that are built around improved educational program quality. Comparison of education to the disruption
 of the steel industry by mini-mills (a connection some have made because Christensen uses this as a classic example of disruption)
 is not a valid comparison. Disruption in education is not about replacing the low end of a well-defined product. It’s about redefining
 quality in a much more complex world of knowledge than that from which most current educational models were designed.  So, for instance,
 a true disruption in education would be highly desirable/effective K-masters degree in 15-16 years versus the current 19 years
 (ideally that meets the needs of under performing populations as well as traditionally successful populations).
The next phase of true progress will be to come out of the current era of massification into a new era of more real world
 relevant and personalized educational pathways.  Massification of educational experiences will not be the ticket to success
 in the next wave of educational models. It seems that many of the entrepreneurs and investors in the education space fail to
 realize that we have already been in the era of massification of education for the last 30 years or so in developed countries.
 The disruption in terms of content will need to be content that enables educational experiences that are up-to-date (read “relevant”),
 adaptive to the interests of the learner, easily adaptable by teachers and yet thorough in terms of teaching the educational foundation
 that are defined via #1.  No offense to our friends at Coursera (one of the growing number of MOOC providers), but “course era” is an
 especially off the mark name for describing the future IMHO.  It is NOT a course era now in education nor will it be in the future.
 It is the same era that it has been: which is one in which a distinctive program of high quality education will be highly valued.
 It's just that we need to do a better job getting such distinctive programs to the currently underserved populations at a better price point.
 Yes, there will be different sources of supporting digital resources that will help enable the redesign of educational delivery
 (potentially a role for MOOC courses). As discussed in other LI blog posts (here & here) digital resources will need to be in a form
 of a highly usable toolkit for faculty and learners.  But, these supporting resources have a VERY long way to go to meet the needs of
 learners. And, the more available (i.e. free, open, massive, etc) a course or content becomes the faster it will become commoditized.
Education is the ultimate “long tail” market with a growing proliferation of high value niche providers and boutique programs. This is
 only going to increase in the future. Contrary to other recent online phenomena like facebook or twitter, education is not a “winner take all”
 market. I was at an education investor conference earlier this year where a leading investment advisor made the statement that education
 is the “ultimate winner take all market.” Education, if done correctly, is life success enabling. The more unique and distinctive your
 educational experience is, the more valuable it is. The ability to produce knowledge is the key currency in the current and future global
 economy. There is no distinctiveness to attending “Massified University.” And, a credential from a massive provider will most likely be such
 a commodity that most will prefer not to waste their time on it (other than for pure fun or reference). We need many more niche-oriented
 institutions that provide specialized, career-enabling and life-enabling education. Note that even large public institutions, while having
 many students, can engage this philosophy to create a large number of differentiated programs of study.   Therefore, the “disruptive
 technology platforms” for education will need to enable great diversity. Diversity in terms of delivery models and blending of high touch
 with personalized self-service.  Disruptive platforms will also need to enable seamless integration among cooperating providers of the various
 components of a solution – meaning close partnership among institutions as well as innovative learning tools.  Old style Web 2.0 thinking
 of the single pervasive platform or the single way of analyzing data will not work for the future of education. Education is not that
 simple (sorry!).
Are MOOCs potentially promising innovations? Yes. They are clearly an evolution of the trend toward pervasive online/blended/more flexible
 educational models/flipping the classroom. Will they disrupt education?  Not on the current trajectory. They pretty much fly in the face
 of the three tenants above.

But, there are some potential ways in which MOOCs could be disruptive in a more limited way.

I think MOOCs have the potential to be disruptive on the low end of the education market as a new model for delivering “open university
 style education.”  For example, today’s MOOCs could be an appealing alternative to the content portion of massive open universities
 around the world, featuring star professors from highly ranked universities. And, such populations of learners could probably support
 an advertising/low course fee model of consumption. So, open university providers get a “pay per use” version of content (versus the
 larger investments they must make today for tuition) that is likely better than what they are offering today, which if subsidized by 
 advertising (net revenue equals small pay per use from open university provider coupled with advertising revenues) could equate to 
 substantial revenues over a large numbers of users with similar interests (as indicated by the topic of study).

In such a model MOOCs could also double as a new type of “tutorial” reference materials. Very much like Kahn Academy, which is often 
referred to as a MOOC now even though it existed for a few years prior to the term.

Would this application of MOOCs be disruptive? Well, if you consider displacement of open universities and/or 
a new business model for them disruptive, then yes.  This approach could potentially disrupt the open university
 market worldwide and create a much larger interest in open university derivative models as a way to learn more
 about a particular topic and/or as preparation for entry to other universities.  Will they substitute for those universities
 – no. Such a disruption will not radically change the efficiency of higher education segment at all.

Is there a strong motivation for current providers of education to engage in this model? Unclear. As previously discussed 
the more you commoditize an educational experience the less valuable the education is. As discussed above the next stage in
 education is greater diversification, not massification. Personally I would like to see existing institutions respond to the three 
 factors above by rolling out new “institutes” with new types of degree programs that meet the evolving needs of society.

Should open universities or other new entrants that wish to compete in that space try a MOOC/advertising/low course fee supported model? 
 I hope so.  That would be a good fit with the “course-focused” strength of MOOCs.  It would also provide a potential revenue producing 
 and marketing outlet for institutions and their “star teachers.” Of course there are the normal challenges of achieving accreditation 
 from the countries/states as needed to prove value to the potential students.

So, hooray for the MOOC phenomena in terms of making claims about needed innovations such as scale, analytics and the potential power
 of star teachers that will help accelerate the innovation trend toward online/blended that we are already on! And, congratulations
 to the leading institutions willing to make a space to try out the MOOC innovations as another set of tools that might be leveraged
 in the quest for improved education.

However, I would say that if you don’t know at this point why you are investing (in terms of what impact you expect will sustain at your
 institution, and therefore what the return on your investment is likely to be) then you are not applying the level of critical thinking
 you need to. Personally I would be asking MOOC providers to take the risk in terms of proving the validity of the market/business model
 (such as the ideas around open university displacement) – and not taking on that risk for my university. 
 
 
 Government---------------------------------
 
 The disruptive potential of digital technologies has become a hot topic in recent years.
 There are calls for governments to add or remove regulations, invest in digital start ups,
 and protect the jobs of workers threatened by new ways of doing business. This research paper reviews
 and interprets expert opinion on disruption in order to inform governments about the policy tasks posed
 by digital technologies. For the Commission, this review sets a broader framing for the formal inquiries
 into Data Availability and Use, and Intellectual Property Arrangements. It also provides context for important
 work that we expect to come to us on productivity growth in a time of apparent digital transformation.

With rapid advances in computing power, connectivity, mobility, and data storage capacity over the last few decades,
 digital technologies offer opportunities for higher productivity growth and improvements in living standards. But they 
 also pose risks of higher inequality and dislocation of labour and capital. Speculation about the effects of technologies often
 suffer from extreme optimism or pessimism. In the 1930s, several countries were enthusiastically experimenting with using new rocket
 technology to deliver mail, and in 1959, the United States trialed mail delivery via cruise missile, a proposition that could now be
 regarded as comical. The Commission has attempted to avoid the overly excited or dire views of the impacts of current digital technologies,
 while recognizing their potential where evident.

There is nevertheless a serious debate amongst economists on whether we are extracting less benefit from today's digital disruption than from 
previous disruptions or industrial revolutions of the 1870s, 1920s or even 1980s. The data suggests this is so — Australia, and indeed other
 advanced economies, has yet to see digital technologies drive significant productivity growth or result in substantial disruption at a sector
 or economy wide level.

This is not a matter of minor technical interest. Productivity in its clearest form — multifactor productivity — has not recorded the kind of growth
 that would be expected from a period of change described as 'disruptive'. While measurement of the productivity of new technologies is often problematic,
 US analysis indicates that measurement issues do not sufficiently explain the drop off in productivity. The open and critical questions are: whether the 
 current economic lassitude is primarily a delay before the onset of significant social and economic changes driven by digital disruption; whether government
 policies (or lack of them) might themselves be frustrating the realization of the benefits; or whether the effects of this disruption are less fundamental
 than initially thought.

The scope for pro productivity policies — drawing on both digital and non digital opportunities — will be examined in the Commission's future work. This 
report contributes to that task by exploring the potential impacts and challenges of digital technology for markets and competition, workers and society,
 and the way governments operate. With a few exceptions, governments across Australia have, to date, evidenced largely reactive responses to dealing with
 digital technologies. Despite promising statements, we have also been unremarkable in our adoption of technologies to improve public sector processes
 and service delivery.

In a short paper such as this, we do not seek to answer big policy questions in any comprehensive way but rather provide an informed direction about where
 policy may need to go. And while we hope to avoid 'rocket mail' errors, we expect that not every Finding reached in this report will ultimately prove
 accurate. But absence of conjecture in this space would be both timid and unhelpful to the development of a productivity policy agenda.

The Commission anticipates digital technologies will continue and likely accelerate changes in Australia's economy. Digital technologies offer greater scope
 for more distributed production, and facilitate the trend toward more service elements — pre and post production services — in manufactured and other goods.
 Data is a new source of market power but, in the face of the digital economy, advantage may also only be short lived. How governments deal with market
 power will be important for both those who control, and those who want to use, data and networks. Digital platforms are enabling greater utilization of assets,
 including research and household assets. Where governments enable this, firms, households and consumers stand to benefit from a greater product range,
 new sources of income and often lower prices. More generally, digital platforms afford more power to consumers than in the past — they can share views on products
 and make more informed consumer choices. Some regulations aimed at improving consumer information may become redundant; those aimed at ensuring information is
 authentic and platforms are not gamed, may become critical.

There is much governments can do to enable the creation and take up of digital reform opportunities without favoring particular technologies. In markets that
 are currently highly regulated but where digital technologies allow more producers — electricity generation is one such case — governments will need to review
 the institutional and regulatory arrangements to ensure that new technologies can compete for market share. More generally, standards to support interoperability
 of digital technologies and ensuring investment in enabling infrastructures (such as reliable and readily upgradeable communications networks), can help with rapid
 technological diffusion.

There will be adjustments that come with digital disruption. Some workers will struggle to adjust to changes in demand for their skills and new, more flexible but
 less reliable, work options. Australia's social safety net will remain important in mitigating risks for workers and lessening the effects of a widening distribution
 in incomes. Broader protections for an individual's rights (such as with control of personal information) and to support society's moral and ethical mores (relevant
 to technological advancements into artificial intelligence, remote sensing and medical research) will require ongoing government attention informed by scientific evidence.

Digital technologies offer governments scope to improve their own service delivery, including through better assessment of risk in regulatory activities, integration of
human services, and infrastructure management. Digital technologies will also make governments more publicly accountable than in times past and raise pressure for
greater transparency. By showing leadership in their own practices, re designing regulation to enable rather than block the adoption of digital technologies, and
mitigate community level risks where practical, governments can do more than they appear to envisage today.

